# RISC-V Summit North America 2023 (Santa Clara)
## Introduction
This a 3-day event from 6th to 8th Nov. The first day was the member-only event while the rest were more focus on marketing, general introduction, demo, poster and socalization. Almost all sessions were less than 30-min, so not much of deep technical ones. Since Qualcomm is the sponsor of the organziation, I was able to attend the member-only events. The session videos can be found here: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL85jopFZCnbMfMRR25ENcRkhhAUGwP5C5
## Day-1
I was late for the RISC-V 101 due to public transportation hiccups. This was a great half-day introduction sessions for RISC-V beginners. All videos can be found here: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL85jopFZCnbOBxiKAMG00zFyx9g9q5mht One of the sessions was about the point of entry for companies to get access to RISC-V technology:
- RISC-V exchange: a official marketplace for hardware, software, services and trainings.
- OpenHW group: open-source cores related offerings.
- RISE (RISC-V Software Ecosystem): open-source software for RISC-V
- Vendor-specific sites like Green Hills for Software, Andres as a core provider, and Microchip as a silicon provider.

The next session talked about "Buy vs Make" mindset when coming to RISC-V. As expected, there are tradeoffs to balance among flexibilty, cost and easy-of-use. There are more companies providing high quality offerings like MIPS Technologies had been switched to embrace RISC-V lately and give up on MIPS ISA. Seagate (most famous for its storage products) is getting into the customized RISC-V core business. In that sense, RISC-V does open up a new world of open markets for hardware ecosystem where a single vendor like ARM Ltd. has no match of it.

In the afternoon, I attended the Priledged Software HC (Horizontal Committee). They were pretty happy to see in the last year that IOMMU Architecute Specification and Advanced Interrupt Architecture Specification had been ratified. Then, I attended the Unprivileged Specification ISA Committee where finally meet one of the founders, Krste Asanovic in person.

Later, in Secuirty HC, One of the most important projects people are working on is CHERI (Capability Hardware Enhanced RISC Instructions) which was based on the research from University of Cambridge. It has already been implemented in ARM, and the RISC-V implementation would only be conceptual compatible with ARM.

Next, in SOC Infrastructure HC, people are working on DTPM (Debug Trace and Performance Monitoring) SIG where there are two technology. One is E-trace (Efficent Trace), and the other is N-trace (Nexus-based Trace). In a nutshell, N-trace provides more complete, end-to-end trace from cores to interconnect in SOC. To trace multiple harts (cores), it needs one encoder per hart. We can also trace only part of the system by using triggers. Then, it will send the full messages when something went wrong.

There was a wonderful socal event hosted by Impera where the whole ballroom was packed with music, drinks and food. Unfortunately, I had to leave early to catch the public transportations.
## Day-2
First, the keynote from RISC-V International CEO to look back as a sucessful year of 2023. RISC-V Lab was created for CI testing of software and host machine resources for community to develop software ecosystems. Two market development groups had also been formed this year. The next keynote from Ventana which is developing RISC-V servers that already in production. The CEO mentioned that all hyperscalers have plans for RISC-V. The server ISA space has been moved from scaler-central to vector-central, and now to accelerator-central. The CPU-alone architecture design did not fit the needs anymore.

Then, Meta talked about they needed to build a RISC-V-based customized video processing unit where only 25% of CPU utilization is required. The existing microarchitecture offerings in the market did not have entensive capacity they required. Later, Microchip showcased their security IoT devices. Last, Ziad Asghar from Qualcomm to build a first RISC-V smartwatch with Google where there is no burden for backwards compatibility. It will have Adreno GPU and 5G modem as well.

For breakout sessions, I went to A Comparative Analysis of RISC-V Architecture Based on the RISC-V SoC DV Experience from Samsung. Nothing too exciting about that talk, so the only thing I can remember was the remark to compare RISC-V with Linux to see if the former could be as successful as the latter. Then, there was a session about Codeplay SYCL specification which defines a single source C++ programming layer that is built on top of OpenCL which looks like Intel's attempt to migrate CUDA users. oneAPI includes an open-source implementation of SYCL. Codeplay was working to make oneAPI no longer an Intel thing where it can be used by community. Codeplay was acquired by Intel.

Then, I ended up working on some important company meetings and missed a few talks. In the afternoon, I attended "Challenges in CPU DV: Why 'It Boots Linux' is Not Verification". Basically, it was the evil in the details where it missed a few ISA-level bugs where additional tracing and verification strategy were required. For "SIMD everywhere" talk where the task was to migrate legacy ARM NEON code to RVV (RISC-V Vector Extensions) code, the only comment was that those looks like a University-based project where it was great to see younger generations to take advantage of RISC-V to bring open innovation in the table.

In the meantime, I joined "State of the Union for Olympia: A RISC-V OoO Processor Model for Community-Use" from Ventana. Olympia is a Performance Model written in C++. There was a question to compare this with gem5 simulator which is a modular platform for computer-system architecture research, encompassing system-level architecture as well as processor microarchitecture. The speaker explained that Olympia had an advantage that be more flexible and extenstible without writting a lot of C++ code.

Next came Zjid extension from IBM. IBM has been used similar for thier Power processors. This was to replace the FENCE.I instruction. The use case was for JIT where it needs a synchronized point for newly created instructions. For demo section, Lauterbach presented RISC-V 64-bit support where the speaker described a few different models range from high-speed debug to low-cost. The presenter did sound quite knowledgable and layout of their debugger GUI looks powerful as usual. Interested readers can check their PDF --https://static.sched.com/hosted_files/riscvsummit2023/f3/Lauterbach%20RISC-V%20Trace%20Solutions%20Demo%20-%202023.pdf

I endded up staying long for that demo and missed the first end-of-day keynotes. Synopsis keynote used this oppotunity to talk about their new ARC-V IP after acquired ARC ISA. They were not targeted for datacenter or automotive but for wide-range of applications. They were supported by MetaWare Development Toolkits which has 40-year of continuous development and improvement. The last keynote of the day showcased many innovated products and services from many startups and established companies from academia, public to commerical sectors.
## Day-3
The last day started with some keynotes as usual. The state of union talk focused on progress had been made but required more paticipations from elsewhere. It was nice to meet Red Hat people again, Stephen Watt was the speaker and I had worked with him in the past on a Kubernetes project closely. He was always a fun character. It was great to see him get promoted to the CTO office and strategically work on the RISC-V front. The talk was pretty much inline with Qualcomm's ideas about AI happening on Edge. Then, there was that Codasip created the world-first CHERI-enabled RISC-V processors.

For the breakout sessions, PMP, WorldGuard, CHERI: Verifying RISC-V Security talked about using PMP (Physical Memory Protection) instruction, WorldGuard which is PMP for SoC as well as LowRISC's CHERI implementation to verify security. The scalable confidential computing talk which is concering about each VM in a cloud environment to make them secure, encrypted and data not to be manipulate by other tenants and even cloud providers. The proposal included some Non-ISA enhancements that can work across TCB (Trusted Computing Base). In CHERIoT from Microsoft, it provided a security solution for 32-bti IoT RISC-V devices. Since there are many memory-related CVEs in the past, CHERIoT would help with memory safety. It has an implementation of the CHERIoT ISA in Sail which is a language for describing the ISA semantics of processors.

Moving forwards, the E-trace session mentioned that it was originally donated by Siemens, and then ratified in RISC-V. A few implementations of the spec showed a good compression ratio resulted in less overhead for instruction trace bits per instruction. It was primarily designed for hart (core) tracing. During the demo time, Ubuntu talked about their involvement with RISC-V for a long time and almost all main-stream RISC-V boards capable running Linux were Ubuntu-ready. For NEOX TM (TinyML) is the first RISC-V GPUGU. It supported 4x4 matrix-unit instructions and RV64IMFC (64-bit integer multiplication and division, float-point and instruction compressed extensions) ISA.

Finally, the keynote panel chiplet discussion included a speaker from Arteris which had FlexNoC product been acquired by Qualcomm, but the latter did not maintain any ownership of the company. Ventana Micro introduced UCIe interconnect which has yet to be standardized but the goal was to provide a connection between chiplets components. 
## Remark
Geopolitical tension, globally reduced enterprise spending trend and gold-rushing to AI could push RISC-V to a new height. The number of RISC-V startups are just astonishing as well as old players embraced RISC-V fully. If the history is right again, to achieve the success of Linux, RISC-V needs to attract more volunteers who are not hired by commerical companies just for profit but rather willing to work for passion and a better world because of it.

There are still a long way to go the be able to catch ARM in term of functionality and software ecosystem. The foundation is solid for RISC-V with elegant base ISAs and legacy-free architecture. The number of innovated products and services showed up in the summit was difficult to comprehensive. In that regard, it had already been successful by providing a platform for all companies in the world to collaborate. With the increasing number of higher-education courses been taught with RISC-V, the deal is only getting sweeter to accelerate the RISC-V movement.

Regardless if RISC-V could replace ARM in all industries, one thing is almost certain that we will see a push every decade to dethrone ARM either it is RISC-V or a new ISA because foundamentally little could be changed for ARM and the cycle of change is inevitable.
